---
title: "Book Recommendation"
author_id: 0
tags: 
    - Hinduism 
    - Buddhism
layout: post
image: buddhaganesha.jpg
selected: true
summary: |-
    By the early 17th century, anthropologists had devised a classification system for the worlds’ belief systems. The four species in the genus “religion” were Christianity, Mohametanism, Judaism, and Idolatry...The attempt to classify Asian traditions eventually crystallized in the formation of familiar nomenclatures, “Hindouism” and “Boudism”...Even though labeling has suggested “Buddhism” and “Hinduism” were entirely separate entities, the political and religious atmosphere following the Buddha suggests this distinction is largely unfounded.
---


By the early 17th century, anthropologists had devised a classification system for the worlds’ belief systems. The four species in the genus “religion” were Christianity, Mohametanism, Judaism, and Idolatry (Smith 271). Though a “steady stream of reference works undertook… [the] task” of collecting data on Asian traditions, the category Idolatry was utilized until well into the nineteenth century. The attempt to classify Asian traditions eventually crystallized in the formation of familiar nomenclatures, “Hindouism” and “Boudism” (Smith 275-76). However, even without “Idolatry” as a category, most classifications make it “impossible to escape the suspicion that a world religion is simply a religion like ours…a tradition that has achieved sufficient power and numbers to enter our history” (Smith 280). As a result, the most objective method of categorizing beliefs, similar to categorization of languages, relies on “geographical taxonomies” to chart regions where ideas are exchanged (Smith 279). Of course, the use of “beliefs” still raises questions about truth, but perhaps no system of classification is perfectly infallible. Under a geographical categorization, regions characterized by a “decentered profusion of ideas” would be classified under the same “big tent.”  With respect to traditions classified under “Buddhism,” a term that will, for now, be used for convenience purposes, a Centralist might “identify a single…hegemonic, orthodox tradition” with similar rituals and beliefs (Richard Davis, “A Brief History of Religions in India”  6). However, the variety of belief systems that are conventionally grouped within “Buddhism” should, in fact, be classified within separate regional tents because each of these traditions exchanged ideas primarily with local traditions. As a result of these exchanges, each surviving tradition has distinct rituals and beliefs.
	
Though many tents, characterized by a decentered exchange of ideas, have formed and disintegrated throughout history, with respect to traditions conventionally labeled “Buddhism,” the pan-Indian tent remains one of the most important. Even though labeling has suggested “Buddhism” and “Hinduism” were entirely separate entities, the political and religious atmosphere following the Buddha suggests this distinction is largely unfounded. Although “Buddhism…[defines itself] by rejecting the claims of the Vedas, so too do…[some Hindu] teachers” (Richard Davis, “A Brief History of Religions in India”  6). Even Centralists acknowledge that in India, “various groups employing vernacular languages in preference to Sanskrit, questioning the caste order, and rejecting the authority of the Vedas, may periodically rebel against the center” (Richard Davis, “A Brief History of Religions in India”  6). As a result, there is no reason to believe the Buddha’s radicalness was fundamentally alien to the religious atmosphere of India at the time, though his ideas may have received considerably more support than other groups rejecting the Vedas. In fact, “for several centuries [after Ashoka], every successor dynasty…in India would begin to patronize Buddhists as its primary, though never exclusive, religious recipients” (Richard Davis, “A Brief History of Religions in India”  20). The willingness of dynasties to patronize multiple traditions is a testament to the pluralistic nature of Indian society. The Guptas, for example, “lavishly [patronized] Buddhist institutions while also declaring themselves followers of Vishnu” (Richard Davis, “A Brief History of Religions in India”  24). The pluralistic nature of India’s religious atmosphere allowed the Guptas and other dynasties to admire the Buddha while simultaneously worshipping other deities. In this setting, “members of many religious persuasions articulated their differing positions and debated their views in public and at court” (Richard Davis, “A Brief History of Religions in India”  31). Perhaps an even stronger example of India’s pluralistic tendencies is the immense respect that traditionally Buddhist texts give to renouncers of other traditions. These texts use a “blanket expression for holy men,” samana-brahmana. The Buddha became a samana-brahmana “by ‘going forth’” (Richard Gombrich, “Theravāda Buddhism” 58). With such a blanket term, the relative equality that “Buddhist” texts award holy men, both “Buddhist” and “non-Buddhist,” becomes apparent. Similarly, in Ashvaghosha, “Life of the Buddha”’s account of Buddha’s birth, the poet praises the ascetic Asita as a “great seer…blazing with the splendor of Brahman, and the splendor of ascetic toil” (Ashvaghosha, “Life of the Buddha” 21). Though some traditions categorized as Buddhist may disapprove of intense ascetic practices, there still seems to be a profound respect for these renouncers. This respect indicates that Indian “Buddhist” traditions did not see themselves as fundamentally different from other renouncer traditions.  Scholarly debates, dynasties patronizing many traditions, and Indian “Buddhism’s” respect for other renouncers are a testament to India’s position as the first “big tent” in which ideas of the Buddha and other teachers were exchanged.
	
A Centralist, however, might cite antagonisms between “Buddhists” and other Indian traditions as reasons why the Buddha’s ideas were a truly distinct phenomenon, outside this Indian tent of exchange. However, at least with respect to persecution, though “there had been persecutions of Buddhism by various…kings in the past…these had been localized and short lived, often followed by an infusion of support under another dynasty” (Donald S. Lopez, Jr., “The Story of Buddhism” 7). Furthermore, if periodic antagonism distances the Buddha’s followers in India from the Indian tent, antagonisms between traditions categorized as “Buddhist” ought to shed skepticism on a centralist categorization as well. In Tibet, “according to both Chinese and Tibetan records, a debate was held between Kamasila and Mohoyen … According to Tibetan accounts, Kamasila was declared the winner and Mohoyen and his party were banished from Tibet.” Though this debate likely never occurred, the story highlights antagonisms between Chinese and Tibetan “Buddhism” (Donald S. Lopez, Jr., “The Story of Buddhism” 129). Although periodic antagonism may have existed between followers of the Buddha and other traditions, antagonisms were not unique to “Buddhist” and “non-Buddhist”. 

Furthermore, this antagonism is overshadowed by the exchange of ideas that occurred between “Buddhist” and “non-Buddhist” traditions in India. In India, local beliefs were influenced by traditions conventionally identified as “Buddhist”. The rise of kings patronizing Buddhism led to “important changes within the most prevalent forms of Hinduism” (Richard Davis, “A Brief History of Religions in India”  7). While some of these changes were developments in which deities were considered supreme, many Indian traditions also absorbed “Buddhist” ideas. The Upanishads and the Buddha concur on the problem of desire, with Upanishads claiming that ridding oneself of desire is the means to salvation (Richard Gombrich, “Theravāda Buddhism” 46). As a result, it is unclear whether the idea first originated in the Upanishads or from the Buddha himself (Lecture 8/7). Furthermore, “the philosophical method developed within the…Madhyamaka school exerted a strong influence on Shankara and his…interpretation of the Upanishads” (Usarski, “Facets of the Relationship between Buddhism and Hinduism,” 161). Though many of the Upanishad texts were formed prior to Buddha, it seems local traditions considered his ideas and evolved accordingly.

These local traditions also had a considerable impact on “Buddhist” traditions in India, completing the “big tent” of ideas exchanged in the subcontinent. An important continuity between the Upanishad traditions and the Buddha was the rejection of possession states and the subsequent “[inculcation] of control” found in later Brahmanism (Richard Gombrich, “Theravāda Buddhism,” 37).  Likewise, though “Buddhist texts are probably the earliest we have” on meditation, “Sanskrit texts…probably reflect a much older tradition,” once again, illustrating the continuity between older Indian traditions and “Buddhist” traditions (Richard Gombrich, “Theravāda Buddhism,” 44). Furthermore, “all classical Indian traditions from the Upanishads on, took it as axiomatic that never ending rebirth was undesirable,” and the Buddha’s ideas were no exception to this rule (Richard Gombrich, “Theravāda Buddhism” 45). The cosmologies of Indian traditions are also connected, since “classical Hinduism, Buddhism, and Jainism all envisage that time progresses through vast cycles” (Richard Gombrich, “Theravāda Buddhism,” 33). The examples of continuity between the Upanishads and the Buddha illustrate a decentered profusion of ideas that was present before the Buddha’s ideas became popular. Developments within the “Buddhist” tradition express the continuation of this decentered profusion, even after the Buddha passed away. In Life of the Buddha, Ashvaghosha, “Life of the Buddha” alludes to Manu’s “three debts” when defending “the position that a man should take to asceticism only in old age” (Ashvaghosha, “Life of the Buddha”, xviii). In the same text, Ashvaghosha, “Life of the Buddha” “models the departure of the Buddha from his city to the forest after that of Rama” (Asvhaghosha, xx). Ashvaghosha, “Life of the Buddha”’s references to “Hindu” texts and ideas expresses the adoption of “non-Buddhist” ideas into the “Buddhist” tradition. Perhaps the most fundamental development was the adaption of “Hindu” deities into Theravada practices. In fact, even today, “one often finds a side temple for some major Hindu deities attached to a Buddhist shrine, and the devotees are encouraged to approach…for help in their mundane needs” (Usarski, “Facets of the Relationship between Buddhism and Hinduism,” 162). The continuity from Upanishads to the Buddha and inclusion of “Hindu” ideas in the “Buddhist” traditions highlight the interconnectedness, and exchange of ideas between traditions located in the big Indian tent. 

Once “Buddhist” ideas branched out to Tibet, the Tibetan religious atmosphere, characterized by an exchange of “Buddhist” and local traditions, made Tibet a separate tent from India. As a result of these exchanges, the beliefs of Tibetan “Buddhism” were fundamentally altered, distinguishing it from various Indian traditions. The first king to choose between “Buddhist” traditions and local traditions was “Tri Songdetsen…[who] promoted Buddhism…[but] continued to have rituals performed that involved animal sacrifice” (Donald S. Lopez, Jr., “The Story of Buddhism” 126). Tri Songdetsen is similar to Ralpajen and his two predecessors who, “despite their patronage of Buddhism…gave numerous public testimonies to their attachment to principles irreconcilable with Buddhism, principles pertaining to the…system of divine kingship” (138). The combination of the Indian “Buddhist” tradition with seemingly incompatible local beliefs highlights a period of Tibetan pluralism. Many Tibetan traditions also incorporated pre-“Buddhist” deities into their pantheon. Buddhist texts “describe the Tibetan landscape as itself a giant demoness…[where] spirits must be honored to avoid their wrath.” However, “the landscape is not only a domain of danger, it is also an abode of opportunity, blessing, and power.” As a result, “pilgrimage is an essential element of Tibetan life, with pilgrims seeking to derive…purification by visiting…the abode of a god or a god itself” (128). Despite protests by the Tibetan traditions that their beliefs are all derived from India, the traditions categorized within Tibetan Buddhism “partake fully of rituals, beliefs, and pantheons that predate either of them” (Donald S. Lopez, Jr., “The Story of Buddhism” 148). Similarly, though the exact origin of the Bon tradition in Tibet is unknown, it seems “Bonpos appropriated pre-Buddhist Tibetan cosmologies, deities, and terminology” (Donald S. Lopez, Jr., “The Story of Buddhism” 148). Though adherents of “Buddhism” often thought of the Bonpos as “benighted performers of animal sacrifice,” the two groups nonetheless exchanged ideas: “recent scholarship has shown that some of the accounts of Padmasambhava’s conquests are based on Bonpo accounts of Shenrap” (Donald S. Lopez, Jr., “The Story of Buddhism” 147 & 148). Likewise, “in an attempt at reconciliation and appropriation, later Bonpo texts state that Sakyamuni was actually an emanation of Shenrap” (Donald S. Lopez, Jr., “The Story of Buddhism” 148). The exchange and mingling of ideas between Bonpo, “Buddhist”, and local Tibetan traditions culminated in the development of Tibetan Buddhism. As a result of these processes, even today, “many [Tibetan “Buddhist”] deities cannot be identified as simply Indian or Tibetan” (Donald S. Lopez, Jr., “The Story of Buddhism” 127). Furthermore, the importance of deity and spirit worship to “Buddhists” in both Tibet and China was recognized by the Chinese government, which often could not distinguish between “Buddhist” temples and those of local spirits (Lecture 11/3). Though traditions that arrived in Tibet were originally of Indian, or, in the case of the Bonpos, Central Asian origin, these traditions outgrew their original identities through the exchange of ideas with local traditions. As a result, a Tibetan tent, which highlights the growth of new traditions through the exchange of local Tibetan ideas, is an optimal categorization for traditions conventionally included in the Tibetan Buddhist, Bonopo, and local tradition categories. 

A more recent development in the growth of “Buddhist” traditions is the development of a Western tent, characterized by a decentered profusion of ideas from many traditions. The breadth of this tent is enormous and is influenced by many diverse traditions across Asia. A Westerner interested in Asian traditions might have “no allegiance to…Zen, Theravada, [or] Tibetan” traditions. She might “prefer Buddhist teachings,” but read “popular books and attend occasional talks by Hindu and neo-Pagan teachers” (McMahan, “The Making of Buddhist Modernism” 29). A Western “Buddhist” sympathizer thus absorbs ideas from other tents, adapting Asian ideas to the Western model. A Western “Buddhist” sympathizer’s interpretation of “Buddhism” is characterized by “the equality of men and women, the superiority of democracy, [and] the soundness of science in describing…the physical world.” Her interpretation of “Buddhist” ideas stems from a knowledge of “western psychology, [and] philosophy” (McMahan, “The Making of Buddhist Modernism” 29). Here, the “amalgam of popularized Buddhist and Hindu teachings, and generally accepted scientific ideas” is a testament to the Wests’ increasingly pluralistic nature. The reason the West receives its own tent is because “a small minority of western Buddhists has had a great impact on how Buddhism is understood in the West.” These Western “Buddhists” “have authored best-selling, internationally distributed books, gone on lecture tours, and set up their own institutions” (McMahan, “The Making of Buddhist Modernism” 39). As a result of these Western “Buddhists,” we find an exchange of ideas between Asian traditions, secularism, and even Christianity occurring in the West. “Buddhists” and “Buddhist” sympathizers, in absorbing Asian ideas, mixed those ideas with Christian ideas. For these Westerners, “God, Brahman, and buddha-nature all point to” an ultimate reality, and there is “little conflict between membership in the church and Buddhist practice” (29). The self-described “Baptist-Buddhist” Janice Dean Willis, “Dreaming Me: Black, Baptist and Buddhist” sees “eternal truths espoused by both Baptists and by Buddhists,” so when she feels “sheer and utter terror” during a plane landing, she calls on the Buddhas and Jesus to help her (Janice Dean Willis, “Dreaming Me: Black, Baptist and Buddhist” 338 & 340). Western “Buddhists” are difficult to classify regionally, especially since beliefs seem to vary from individual to individual. It seems strange to place “Buddhists” and Christians in one Western tent, but insofar as both traditions have exchanged ideas, with Christians acknowledging meditation, and “Buddhists” often believing in a single God, there is no reason to separate them. 

However, even this classification is not entirely accurate, as it must be noted that just as Westerners have absorbed ideas from Asian traditions, Asian traditions have absorbed ideas from the West. In fact, “western Buddhists [have] had a great impact on how Buddhism is understood…in Asian countries” as well (McMahan, “The Making of Buddhist Modernism” 39). Some Asian modernizers have had a “western education--attending Christian schools in Sri Lanka…[or] obtaining degrees from Oxford” (McMahan, “The Making of Buddhist Modernism” 41). These highly influential modernizers have not “embraced western modernity as a whole,” and instead, “selectively embrace elements of western modernity… [combining] Buddhist and Western practices into complex hybrids” (McMahan, “The Making of Buddhist Modernism” 42). Ideas have not just traveled to the West from Asia to be morphed by Western culture. There is a mutual evolution of the West with many Buddhist traditions. Nonetheless, it is important to note that these modernizers are not representative of the vast majority of “Buddhists” (McMahan, “The Making of Buddhist Modernism” 41). Perhaps, due to this minority status, the Western exchange with Asian traditions can be considered minor relative to the coevolution of “Buddhism” and Christianity in the Western tent.

In response to this new classification, a Centralist might point to similarities between “Buddhist” traditions like the common founder or meditational practice as evidence of a single orthodox tradition. However, selecting various possible similarities creates arbitrary distinctions, and a growth-based regional categorization is far more objective. Even if this geographic model is rejected, the fundamental nature of spirits and deities, along with differences in worshipped deities between “Buddhist” traditions, would alone be sufficient to divide “Buddhism” into separate categories. Though a lay Buddhist may “make offerings before the large Buddha statue…she and her family [also] perform rituals to honor helpful spirits, [and] protect them from malicious ones.” Furthermore, in a common lay “Buddhist” community, “most people take the existence of sprits as a given” (McMahan, “The Making of Buddhist Modernism” 30). A lay “Buddhist” might “know that some revered Buddhist monks…can provide blessings and protection,” but might still “make use of non-Buddhist sources, like a local shaman, for similar purposes.” This lay “Buddhist” might make “little distinction between the unseen beings that are specifically Buddhist…and those that come from local spirit traditions” (McMahan, “The Making of Buddhist Modernism” 38). Since lay meditation is considered presumptuous, there seems to be little more fundamental to lay communities than spirit and deity worship, and when the objects of worship vary so much from region to region, it becomes difficult to think of Buddhism as one entity (McMahan, “The Making of Buddhist Modernism” 30). Even the notion of a founder is ambiguous. Does Buddha’s influence on local “Hindu” traditions make him a founder of those traditions? Similarly, does the influence of the Buddha’s ideas on local Tibetan traditions, eventually resulting in the formation of Tibetan “Buddhism,” make him a founder? Is the founder of Tibetan “Buddhism” Padmasambhava, who helped construct the first monastery, or the Buddha? (139). It then becomes difficult to classify the Bons who, despite following some “Buddhist” ideas, identify Shenrap as their founder (Donald S. Lopez, Jr., “The Story of Buddhism”, 148). The answers to these questions are unclear, and highlight issues in reducing a variety of diverse traditions to a single entity.

Whereas a Centralist interpretation often seems arbitrary, a geographical classification fails to acknowledge the interconnectedness of many of these tents, especially when distant lands like the West and Asia evolve and exchange beliefs together. On the other hand, this classification system makes it simpler to classify borderline “Buddhist” traditions. For example, the Bons, due to their shared evolution with Tibetan “Buddhism” and local Tibetan beliefs, would easily be categorized in the Tibetan tent, whereas a Centralist interpretation might find it challenging to categorize them. Due to the tendency of many traditions to group and evolve regionally, a geographical categorization is most accurate and objective. In studying the evolution of “Buddhist” traditions, it becomes clear that these traditions evolved in separate locations, exchanging ideas primarily with local traditions after branching out. This evolution made each “Buddhist” tradition incorporate new deities into their pantheon. As a result, it seems the term “Buddhism” cannot possibly refer to all these different traditions. In the end, a Centralist interpretation simply cannot represent such a wide variety of beliefs.

_______________________________________________________________

Works Cited
<br>
<br>
Usarski, Frank. U Revista de Estudos da Religião (2007): 161-162.